Now, let's jump into a screencast of a Python notebook where we will go through
some steps which would be reasonable to analyze this 3D medical imaging volume.
This is a Jupyter Notebook.
In this notebook, we will walk through some of the steps of using Python
to load an imaging dataset and to extract some useful information from it.
We'll be using some libraries here,
we'll be using pydicom library.
Pydicom is a good Python library to parse DICOM files and reads DICOM metadata.
We will use matplotlib to plot some of the images,
to draw some of the images as matplotlibs inside the Jupyter Notebook.
We will use NumPy to process DICOM volumes,
and we will use the OS library to load basically files from the file system.
So we have some volumes sitting next to this notebook
and you will see the same volumes if you want to work with this notebook yourself,
you will see the same volumes in the files that accompany this lessons.
We use pydicom.dcmread to read every DICOM file.
We'll load them into an array,
we call it slices.
By the way, I'm not saying that this is
the best and the most optimized way to load this slices.
If you know some ways to optimize this,
feel free to do it differently.
This is one way of quickly and efficiently getting slices into the memory.
Let's see how many slices we have.
We have 139 slices and this is a CT series which is reasonable.
Let us print so one of those slices and pydicom implements an interface which allows us
to just print one of those objects and it will print all the DICOM metadata.
We see those values.
Remember how we just talked about DICOM.
We talked about how DICOM data elements has this element ID and the group ID.
So we seize all those elements,
this is group a, this is metadata elements.
We have our SOP instance UID,
we have our subclass UID.
By the way, pydicom conveniently converts those complex UIDs
that we've talked about into a human friendly string which is very nice of them.
We see that this image has patient ID.
We see that this image has patient name, parameter setup,
that the name has obviously John Doe is probably has been anonymized.
Let's look at some of the parameters which would be important for
us as we try to figure out what is happening inside this volume.
One of the parameters that you might want to look at,
is a parameter called pixel spacing.
We have talked how the two things,
the pixel spacing and slice thickness,
how they define the geometric parameters of a DICOM volume,
so let's see what's happening with those in our volume,
we see that pixel spacing is 0.76 millimeters and slice thickness is 2.5 millimeters.
We can also see that pixel spacing across x-axis and across y-axis is the same,
so we deal with voxels which are square in the in-plane dimension,
but are non-square in the z-axis.
All right, so these voxels are 0.76 by 2.5
millimeters tall in the coronal or sagittal dimensions.
Let's take a look at another way,
by the way of extracting this value.
If you have noticed, I was using this convenient member variable intercept,
that pydicom library implements to use
a human readable string to address a member of this subject of the slices object.
I can also address one by directly specifying DICOM texts.
This could be useful if you're dealing with datasets,
if you are dealing with some tags which do not have user-friendly names.
Sometimes you will see proprietary tags or a custom tags in those DICOM datasets,
and those tags will not be necessarily a name because they would not be in the standard.
This is the same pixel spacing but its directed by addressing
the pixel spacing as this DICOM group ID like in Element ID format.
So let us try and extract some pixel data from this.
The pydicom object explore
the member which is called pixel_array and this is where all the pixels sit.
Let's use the empty stack function on this list that
will generate by extracting all the pixel array from our slices list.
We have imageData now as a NumPy 3D array.
Let's confirm that it's a 3D array by looking at the shape.
We have 512 by 512 images and 139 slices.
We have our x and y dimensions in the dimensions ID
one and two and we have dimension zero allocated for our Z dimension.
Let's look at what is the data type that we're dealing with.
We're dealing with 16 bit integers.
We've talked how DICOM data has the wide dynamic range.
We have 16 bits of grayscale here,
and we only have eight bits of grayscale that our monitor screen can display.
Let's see if we can just try to visualize a slice.
Let's extract the random slice.
Slice 115 would be reasonable and lets
use Matplotlib with a grayscale color map to visualize it.
This is what we get. Not bad.
Matplotlib what it did just now,
it's clamped it into the 256 bits grayscale space and it works well for the slice.
In this slice, we can see some of the interesting artifacts,
we can see this dark area here,
and we can see a lighter area in the center here,
we can see the dark area here, which our lungs,
as you might already notice through all the medical images we've shown you so far,
and we see some interesting white artifacts here,
which seems to be brighter than these bones over here,
so this is the rib-cage,
this is the spine.
So let's see what else can we do with this image.
Let us visualize a few slices.
This is a convenience code that I like to use in Jupyter notebooks.
You are welcome to take it and use it in yours.
Basically, we are building a table of
a small slices and this gives us a view of what the rest of this volume looks like.
It looks reasonable, no major outliers.
This slices look darker than the others because probably
we have this artifact which is much brighter than the rest of the anatomy.
So we'll talk about this artifact later.
But for now, let's see what else we can do.
Let's try to visualize the coronal slice.
Let's try to extract slice number 250 in the second dimension.
I just know that the second dimension is the coronal dimension.
But as we've talked about, this is something that you would have to discover when you
are dealing with a new DICOM datasets.
I'm extracting slice 250 because we just checked that our volume has
512 by 512 pixels in the X and Y dimension.
What happened here? This looks like human anatomy,
but it's upside down and it's squished.
Why is it squished?
So remember, our voxels are not square,
our voxels are rectangular.
So to display this in the proper format,
we need to apply aspect ratio.
To apply aspect ratio,
we need to make our voxel square.
So we need to divide our slice thickness by our pixel spacing.
Let's apply this aspect ratio coefficient when we
display our image and let's see what we get.
So that looks much better.
It's still upside down,
but we're not trying to display the correct anatomy here.
At least, it does not look squished.
But at this point, let us crop the volume a little bit.
Remember how there was a lot of pixels here that obviously did not relate to any anatomy.
So let's try to crop it a little bit and let's try to focus on the anatomy here.
An interesting thing that we could try is to visualize a histogram of pixel values.
So let's try that.
I'm using the matplotlib hist function to visualize the histogram.
I'm visualizing all the voxels,
but I have some code here to visualize some of this certain voxels.
So what we can see here is that there is
an interesting spike around the value minus 3,000.
A lot of voxels sits between minus 1,000 and plus 1,000.
Then there is something happening here around 3,000.
Well, let's see what is going on here.
For now, let's see what are
the minimum and maximum values that we have on
our histogram and we confirm what we're seeing on histogram.
The minimum value we have in our dataset is minus 3,000,
maximum is plus 3,000.
So at this point, it's good to recall what Hounsfield units are.
We're dealing with a CT scan.
Also we have discussed Hounsfield scale is
a scale that measures radio density of physical matter.
So on Hounsfield scale,
which is the scale to which all the CT scans are calibrated,
we have zero that corresponds to water.
We have minus 1,000, this corresponds to air.
We have bone that sits between 500 and 1,000.
Anything that sits outside of this Hounsfield scale would be,
well, I would say suspicious or at least interesting.
Let's look at our diagram.
So we see a lot of voxels around zero, which makes sense.
Humans are made out of water.
So that's where a lot of the tissue sits.
There's lot of voxels around 1,000,
which also make sense because,
if we look at this image, we have a lot of empty space here.
So this is basically air that we're imaging.
This stuff sits outside the Hounsfield unit.
So let's focus on what is going on there.
Let's look at the bottom end of our image histogram first.
We can see and let's look at the unique values that we have in our crops imagery.
We can see that we have this minus 3,024 value.
Then the next one up is minus 1,024.
So there is nothing in between. This looks suspicious.
This leads us to believe that this value might be
some magic number which was artificially inserted.
Well, to get the real story here,
you will need to understand how the scanner works that took this image.
But for now, we can take a pretty good guess that probably this minus 3,000 is
a value inserted by scanner to fill
the portions of the image where acquisition was not made.
Remember the sine anagram exercise? Remember
how CT scans work by rotating around the patient?
So they require basically a circular image.
This is what we see in the first plot here.
So this is the acquisition area, the circle.
We have rectangular images that we can store in the computer memory.
So that's why we need to pad something into these values in the corners.
This is exactly what this minus 3,000 value is.
So probably the scanner which was used to acquire this just uses this magic number to
designate values which do not belong to any anatomical structures.
So now, let us look at the upper end of our histogram.
So let's do the simple computation.
Let's only display the values which sits between 2,000 and 4,000 on Hounsfield scale.
We see that now we're focusing on
this interestingly shaped thing in
the top right corner of this slice that we have extracted.
So let's try to understand what this shape is.
These are the dimensions of our image that we cropped.
Let us show the cropped image.
So we're zooming in on this structure.
So we see that this structure has very regular corners.
So probably this is something artificial.
Let us try to look at the unique values that sit in this region.
We can see that we do not really see
the same pattern as we've seen with the special value,
with the magic number that CT scanners were inserting.
We see sort of continuous drop in voxel intensities down to 2,000 and maybe low,
which leads us to believe that this thing was actually imaged by the CT scanner.
But probably since it sits outside the Hounsfield unit scale,
this is something artificial.
Let's try to visualize the histogram and that's what we're kind of seeing here.
A lot of very dense voxels here and then some that are less dense.
To confirm our suspicion,
let's actually load this volume into slicer.
So let's go back to the slicer,
which we just looked at.
Let us load this volume here.
Let us visualize this thing in 3D.
So we see a lot of dense tissue here so let's window it a little bit.
Let's see what we are looking at.
So you can see as we change the density of voxels that appear on the screen,
we can actually see a pretty high detail of the shirt that
the patient was wearing and even some pills that they had in their pockets.
But let's remove the lower density
of things and let's focus on the higher density of things.
So you can see as we go past the Hounsfield units,
which corresponds to bones,
we see our interesting structure.
If we look at the structure,
if we zoom in a little bit,
it does look artificial and it actually is.
So to understand what exactly that is,
we can see that it has some opening and there is some tube like thing that goes into,
well, I just know because I asked Mason.
This is inferior vena cava, where it goes to.
To understand what it is,
you would need to ask a clinician and a clinician would tell you that most likely it's
a chemotherapy port which is used to deliver medication into this patient.
So probably this patient has some form
of cancer disease which needs this type of treatment.
So this analysis actually told us quite a bit about this volume.
So we learned that this volume has some outliers,
we learned that this volume has an anomaly.
It has this implant.
One interesting thing to keep in mind,
once we've analyzed this volume,
let us look at the range of the voxels that we're dealing with.
So we see that our voxel sit under 6,000 units of integer, that they occupy.
So they they sit on the range of minus 3,000 to plus 3,000.
What we have seen how pretty much anything that's below 1,000 is irrelevant
because it has to do with the synthetic values which have been added by the scanner.
Probably anything above roughly 1,300 or 1,400 or maybe
1,500 also might not be quite relevant
depending on what you're trying to do because this would be outliers.
These would be things like implants.
So by looking at this volume,
we can get an intuition that if we actually crop the dataset
and get rid of all the values which are outside of this range of minus 1200,
plus 1300, this would allow us to double the precision that we would be
operating with after we convert this dataset into
floating point and feed it into our machine learning algorithms.
So we have just seen how you can approach
the problem of analyzing a 3D medical imaging volume.
We have looked at some of the photometric attributes and we have seen
how outliers might show up in 3D medical imaging volumes.
Let's take a look at how would you approach analyzing a 3D medical image volume dataset.